---
title: my n°1 programming tip
layout: post
---

i recently read an article titled "my top 1 programming tip ever".

it was shit. here's mine:

> carve your data

let me explain.
i often write code like this:

```python
def read_excel(excel):
    data = pandas.read_excel(excel)
    data = data.to_dict()
    data = [datum['x'] for datum in data if datum['y'] == 42]
    return data
```

i know. it's a cardinal sin. 
data is a dataframe, then a dict, then a list of "stuff".

it breaks the first commandment of:

> thou shalt have variables that behave predictably

> and thou shalt not reuse them

> wtf art thou doing?

but compare this to the alternative.

```python
def read_excel(excel):
    df = pandas.read_excel(excel)
    dict_data = df.to_dict()
    filtered_data = [datum['x'] for datum in dict_data if datum['y'] == 42]
    return filtered_data
```

there is a difference.

anyone reading the first code will understand:
*i want my data in a certain way, and i will not rest until i get it.*

i call that **carving data**.

and it matters a lot.
i spend a lot of time doing this.
but the logic flows effortlessly afterwards.

carve it.

now.

---

**17/06/26**

okay no i changed my mind.

the most important tip is **folding**.

> fold

an algorithm is a *list* of instructions.

when you start, your simple code is a simple *list* of instructions.

code gets bigger.

it's still a *list* of instructions,
those instructions just became *list* themselves.
of instructions.
it's turtles all the way down.

and you never fold?

> fold my son, fold

everywhere i look...
nobody folds, people use a minimap like it's lol,
split code in a bazillion files,
why, why? why suffer?!

i swear i should make a code editor
called "origami" where all shortcuts are fold
as rehab therapy.

> done for now? fold

`ctrl-shift-/`: fold.

`ctrl-shift-p`> command panel> type "fold"> "fold all".

and the second most important advice would be: **comment**.
i mapped `ctrl-/` to comment.
look how close it is to fold shortcut.

and then yeah carve your data or whatever, who cares.
