---
title: state of the stocks - july 25
layout: post
---

in an attempt to "diversify my wealth",
i have been investing in the stock market for a year now.

the plan was simple:
put 100€ in a different company each month.

the first company i invested in was **nikola**.

Its stock went bust **immediately** and I lost everything.

0% return rate on investment, well done fucker.

nevertheless, i kept doing it and we are now at 1% roi.

how did i pull this off? let's see.

## company number 2: hexatronic

no idea what i was doing there.
investing in european tech i guess?
stock last half of its value.

## number 3: sap

doubling down on shit choices.
stock lost 20%.

## number 4: first solar

thought the pushback on chinese solar would be greater.
-3%.

## number 5: unibail-rodamco-westfield

following up on a news that they were doing shady shit.
good call: +5%.

## number 6: heineken

i thought invest in this stuff in the winter, sell in the summer.
so far, not great: -1%

## number 7: amundi s&p 500

no idea what that even is.
poppa's bond i guess.
poppa's growth: 2%.

## number 8: safran

european militay spending is off the charts.
+10%.

## number 9: 1&1

+17% after ups and lows.

## number 10: meta

finally some sense.
who cares if ai is a bubble?
selling this whenever possible.
+20%.

## number 11: reddit

i saw an ad. that's all you need to know.
ads mean "we can burn cash, fuck you".
+25%.

## number 12: air france

+35%...
what can i say.

## conclusion

this is abysmal performance.
i am a moron.
