---
title: a good class - part 4
layout: post
---

**note:** this is part 4 in a series of posts about oop.
- [part 1](https://blog.legires.fr/2025/11/15/good_class.html),
- [part 2](https://blog.legires.fr/2025/11/18/good_class_2.html).
- [part 3](https://blog.legires.fr/2025/11/29/good_class_3.html).

---

back at it.

this series is moving slow, because i went back to double check on things.

today, two things:
**more array stuff** and **enums**.

---

first, here's the update on the array table:

| **Code** |    **Range**    |
|:--------:|:---------------:|
| B        | [0, 255]        |
| H        | [0, 65535]      |
| I        | [0, 4 BILLION]  |
| L        |a 20-digit number|

don't use anything else.

now, why did the letters change?

because the numbers may vary.
*it's your operating system that chooses.*

> python arrays only guarantee a *minimal* length.

you can check the actual length with this code:

```python
import array

for t in array.typecodes:
    a = array.array(t, [])
    print(a, a.itemsize)
```

which will output something like:

```bash
array('b') 1
array('B') 1
/home/le/tmp/temp.py:121: DeprecationWarning: The 'u' type code is deprecated and will be removed in Python 3.16
  a = array.array(t, [])
array('u') 4
array('w') 4
array('h') 2
array('H') 2
array('i') 4
array('I') 4
array('l') 8
array('L') 8
array('q') 8
array('Q') 8
array('f') 4
array('d') 8
```

since it's calling the underlying c infrastructure,
i'll stick with:
- B: *binary*
- H: *short*
- I: *integer*
- L: *long*

the other thing i wanted to talk about is how long is *long*.

> long is really long.

if you incremented the value of a long 100 times per second
(for example the timer of your game running at 100fps),
it would take **600 million years** to fill up.

now, is it enough for a secret?

`uuid4()` in python outputs 16 bytes,
so it needs two L slots.

can we try 8? 
after all, i still think the collision risk is low enough with 8.

if you do:

```python
import secrets

s = secrets.token_bytes(8)
u5 = array("L", s)
```

as a password, it would take around 25 million years to guess
(I is not enough, 6 days to guess).
for an id, you could use `random.randbytes(8)`.

good enough?

maybe. **i don't think that's the issue.**

the issue is that i don't need a user_id.
nor do i need to bulk process passwords.

> in ecs, the index is the id.

what's the id of the entity living in the third column of my database?

3. just 3.

(well 2 because of 0-indexing but you get what i mean.)

larger elements like passwords or ids exist only at the boundary level.
so it's fine to have them in some `user_id_to_index = {}` hashmap.

and this is the perfect segue to my point number 2, **design patterns**.

---

i found out that arrays are a good "canary in the coal mine".

> if you wrestle with arrays, you're very close to shooting yourself in the foot.

for example, strings can only exist in two places:

- at the frontier (user input or display)
- as `enum` members

(`array(w)` is for storing characters, and i rarely need that)

the first place, i already told you about.
it's fine if you have a list of document names,
or a hash map with different localized text,
just don't put them in the hot path, please.

(i even think they're a great way to signal we're still on the cold path)

but **we need to talk about enums**.

> enums are a fantastic way to say "this value means that".

look how beautiful this is:

```python
from enum import IntEnum
from array import array


class Entity(IntEnum):
    PLAYER = 0 # no auto!
    GHOUL = 1
    GHOST = 2 


health = array('B', [100, 40, 40])
print(health[Entity.GHOUL])
```

no, for real, `health[Entity.GHOUL]`,
what a pleasure.
there's something so zen about this code,
"i will represent my ghoul by the values at index 1",
well here you go pal.

one important thing to note: no use of `auto()`,
because it starts at 1,
which is inconvenient for indexes.

(why? c-related stuff i guess.
i didn't find more info in the [pep](https://peps.python.org/pep-0435/))

i don't mind not using auto,
explicit is better than implicit anyways,
except maybe for flags.

so... let's add a flag!

```python
from enum import IntEnum, IntFlag, auto
from array import array


class Entity(IntEnum):
    PLAYER = 0
    GHOUL = 1
    GHOST = 2 

class Status(IntFlag):
    BURNING = auto()
    FROZEN = auto()


health = array('B', [100, 40, 40])
attack = array('B', [15, 8, 9])
status = array('B', [1, 3, 3])

damage_mult = 1
if status[Entity.GHOUL] == (Status.FROZEN | Status.BURNING):
    damage_mult = 2

health[Entity.GHOUL] -= damage_mult * attack[Entity.PLAYER]
print(health[Entity.GHOUL]) # 10
```

oh yeah sorry, an `IntFlag`.
well, int or no int,
it's just for not having to call `value` at the end.
i much prefer it.

so here we have it,
a combat calculation where the player damages a ghoul,
dealing extra damage if the ghoul has two status effects.

but i didn't need to tell you that.
it's obvious just by looking at the code.
and it's a joy to come back to.

---

well, we finally have an answer to shakespeare's age-old question:

> what's in a name?

a number.

next episode, we try to implement a sparse set
while not losing it.
