---
title: dear vsb
layout: post
---

dear vsb12,

when i said i'll blast your sound, you said:

> not the first time i hear this

trust me, i understand.

i too heard this a dozen times.
trying to get my music played,
trying to collab with people,
who would give up or ghost me.

who would have thought that it would be
on a peruvian yodeling forum that i would find
my first remixer!

as churchill said,
*"success is stumbling from failure to failure with no loss of enthusiasm"*.
thank you for his great gift,
i was jumping with joy.

---

but after this first joy came a second one,
having found a exceptionnal musician.

what a smart track.

"endless" is a very difficult construct,
with an odd time signature and construction,
and yet you crushed it.

you managed to impose and break a dub rythm,
the sheer intelligence of using a
double bass pattern to answer the original,
the saturated strings to echo the voice-mimicking resonance,
the perfect hold of the drop,
the bass statement at the end...

(i am writing this by head, i've been listening to it on loop lol)

it shows such a deep musical understanding
of the sound, i was so impressed.

and the production quality!

from your screen, it seems you work on lmms.
not the easiest daw!
i've tried it 
[once](https://soundcloud.com/djphronk/inherdreams)
so i understand the struggle lol.

---

now it's my turn.

i've been trying to remix "cellz" for months,
and suddenly everything unstuck.

i did put my sould on it,
and i think it is one of my best works,
along with "atoyot" or "hi mr white".

i'll try to make a video clip for it
(trying some blender + python),
but i wanted to thank you first.

and i also wanted you the be the first one to hear it,
you deserved it.

so, without further ado:

[VSB12 - CELLZ (MM MIX)](/wav/CELLZ.wav)
